---
title: Authority
layout: about
permalink: /Authority.html
credits: true
---
**Respect for Authority (or lack thereof)**

During the 1950s, there was widespread concern regarding a lack of respect towards authority and hierarchy as we had seen them influence day-to-day lives. Both children and adults alike were actively rebelling against the societal structures that were in place. These concerns were substantiated by legitimate reports of an increase in juvenile crime throughout the 1950s. Though the 1950s saw a general increase in crime among both the youth and adult populations, the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports for the United States - 1959 reported that the number of trials among American youth had more than tripled between the years 1941 and 1957. Moreover, there was mounting concern that this pattern of delinquency was not restricted to isolated offenders. Throughout the United States, the public had developed a fear of roaming gangs of children who influenced each other to commit these offenses, and often combined forces in perpetrating them (Barnosky). Though there was concern as to how children were being influenced to rebel against authority, this rebellion was similarly evident in the way that parents were acting as well. Adults were demonstrating a lack of respect for authority and the traditions in place through unions by striking, challenging societal structure through the civil rights movements, and resisting government war efforts like the draft. Authority was being challenged everywhere, on almost every level, leading to even further questioning of the existing traditions and power imbalances in place. While many examples of disobedience existed in this time period, comics were still blamed for the influence that they had over their audience.

Frederic Werthram, child psychologist and leading prosecution in The Senate Comic Book Hearings of 1954, believed that comics were in need of regulation. The overwhelming paranoia experienced by Wertham seemed to be the concern that the content of comics was enabling and encouraging a disruption of societal infrastructures, a matter which was already beginning to pose issues in the existing social non-compliance of the 1950s. In the transcription of The Senate Comic Book Hearings, Wertham argues not only that comics encourage violent behavior, but more specifically that the role of the superhero has taken over respect and tradition which was previously reserved almost strictly for policemen and parents. Quoting his unnamed colleague, Wertham states, “Formerly, the child wanted to be like daddy or mommy. Now they skip you, they bypass you. They want to be like Superman, not like the hard working, prosaic father and mother.” (Senate, 86). 

Wertham’s fight for regulation resulted in the creation and distribution of the Comics Code Authority, a method of self-regulation for comics publishers. In its preamble, the CCA (Comics Code Authority) states “The comic book medium, having come of age on the American Cultural scene, must measure up to its responsibilities.” These responsibilities, of course, being to maintain and uphold positive cultural norms. Some of the resulting reforms include the decisions that  “Respect for parents, the moral code, and for honorable behavior shall be fostered…” (CCA, Marriage and Sex, #3), and that “Policemen, judges, Government officials and respected institutions shall never be presented in such a way as to create disrespect for established authority.” (CCA, General Standards, Part A, #3).

	Werthram’s concerns about disrespect of authority were substantiated in the way many comics treated and depicted people of authority. In one of the works he cited, *Shock Suspenstories No.4*, there were many points in the story that were going against the existing authorities in place, as captured by its cover tagline “Jolting tales of tension in the tradition”. In the first tale, “Split Second”, we see a boss character depicted negatively, being cruel and abusive towards his employees. This escalates where we see both his wife, as well as his employees, betray him because of another younger character’s influence. Similarly in the following tale, “Confession”, not only are the cops, a symbol of authority, depicted as violent and misguided, but also they beat up an older, innocent man. In these, both the idea of rebelling against authority, as well as the triumph of evil and violence are a prominent theme. True to its word, the stories depicted are examples of how tensions in tradition were being tested, exhibiting the disrespect for authority that was part of the moral panic of the time.

This story and page were chosen for their level of relatability to arguments made in Wertham’s hearing. “Confession” is the story of an innocent man forced into a false confession by the Lieutenant of the police force. At the story’s conclusion, it’s revealed that the Lieutenant was the true perpetrator of the crime, and he ultimately faces no punishment for his actions. Page 15 of the story depicts the police officers’ torture of the accused man, Arthur. Throughout the page, the officers appear as towering figures as they brutalize Arthur, refusing to accept his protests of innocence. The scene represents the police as authoritative figures, but not ones worthy of respect or reverence. They deny Arthur due process entirely, instead insisting on his guilt and branding him a “liar” and a “cop-killer.” The text outside the panels describes the scene with clear condemnation for their actions, as well as the Lieutenant’s inaction as he watches the torture unfold.  The backgrounds on the page serve to amplify this condemnation of the police force. The artist makes use of an entirely black background, apart from a spotlight that illuminates the violence and casts the Lieutenant, who remains inactive, in shadow. This scene explicitly violates the acceptable depictions of police officers outlined by the Comic Code Authority, as it states: “Policemen, judges, Government officials and respected institutions shall never be presented in such a way as to create disrespect for established authority.” This story clearly reflects Werthram’s concerns about comic books marring the police’s image as a moral authority.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll058" width="75" %}

