---
title: Censorship
layout: about
permalink: /Censorship.html
credits: true
---
**Censorship of Comics in the 1940s-50s**

**Historical Context**
Starting in 1948 and continuing until the late 1950s, comic books became a major target of censorship in the United States. This extreme and sudden uptick in censorship was a direct result of the widespread fear of communism in the 1940s and 1950s, also referred to as the “Red Scare” (Finan). Although this censorship was not limited to only comic books, and in fact spanned mass media in general (including television and radio), comic books were a primary target because of concerns related to the morality of children. For many years following the Red Scare, comic books were regarded as “indecent literature” and were even burned in schoolyards with the children present (Finan). Many people believed that crime and horror comics in particular encouraged juvenile delinquency in young children, despite the fact that these stories usually showed the criminals being punished (Duke Libraries). Outside parent groups and civic organizations added to this fear, encouraging publishing agencies to censor their own work to avoid retribution from the government. The creation of the Comics Code Authority in 1954 led to even more censorship, particularly the removal of any mature comic book themes from mainstream media for the next few decades (Princeton University Archives). Although the Supreme Court passed a law in 1957 stating that comics containing sexually explicit works could once again be sold legally (Princeton University Archives), the impact on the comic book industry remained, limiting freedom of expression.

**Wertham/Senate Hearings**
In the 1950s, fears of communism and moral corruption put comic books under intense scrutiny. There were many debates about censorship. Politicians would argue that restricting comics was necessary to protect children, while critics warned that censorship was not American. Beginning in the late 1940s, progressive child psychiatrist Dr. Fredric Wertham, launched an informal campaign against comic books. During this time he tried to distance himself from this label as a censor. He declared that he “detest[s] censorship” (Senate, 91), and that he is “not advocating censorship, but it is the comic-book industry which at the present moment tries to censor what the parents read.” (Senate, 92). He framed his position as protecting children, stating, “I believe adults should be allowed to write for adults. I believe that what is necessary for children is supervision” (Senate, 92). His testimony shows the tension of the era: he rejected being branded as a censor, but his campaign seems to align with the cultural impulse to regulate media. This link was visible in the hearings themselves, when Senator Kefauver said, “Anybody who opposes comic books is a Red?” (Senate, 92), and noted that labeling Wertham as a communist seemed like “an effort to tie [him] up in some way as Red or Communist.” (Senate, 92). The exchange highlights how the Red Scare shaped the censorship debate, where even criticizing comics risked accusations. It also highlights the contradiction between Wertham’s anti-censorship claims and his influence on the Comics Code Authority, one of the strongest self-censorship systems in U.S. publishing.

**Evaluating the Comic Books**
The censorship of comics surged in 1954 with the publication of *Seduction of the Innocent* by Dr. Fredric Wertham and the subsequent implementation of the Comics Code of 1954.  The impact of the censorship that followed these acts is very clear when comparing comics written after them to those that had been published before.  Some comics were even rewritten and redrawn to better fit the new standards.  One of the most heavily censored genres of the time was horror, as Section B of the Comics Code was strict about what was allowed to be shown.  We can see many examples of themes that were deemed inappropriate when analyzing *Tales from the Crypt No. 22*, which was published three years before the censorship took over.  When looking at simply the cover alone, the terms “terror,” “horror,” “haunt,” and “fear” are all used in bold and captivating letters.  The cover art is drawn to pique interest and fear in the reader as it features witches and a zombie.  Upon a first glance, this comic would draw in a fan of the horror genre as it explicitly displays the contents of the comic.  However, covers and contents such as this were heavily censored after 1954.  Section B of the Comics Code specifically rallies against the use of the words “horror” and “terror” in the titles of comics.  Also, stories involving certain supernatural aspects, like “the walking dead,” were prohibited.  If these rules are applied to the original cover of *Tales from the Crypt No. 22*, almost none of the original artwork, intent, or subtitles can remain.  Horror isn’t the only genre that was impacted; censorship spread across virtually any and every type of comic book.  To fully understand the extent of the censorship starting in 1954, it is imperative to compare and contrast the comics that had been altered after their original publication in order to adhere to the code.  For example, many outfits, specifically for women in the romance genre, tended to be redrawn to show less skin.  Additionally, superhero comics were redrawn to show less damage and violence.  Overall, the Comics Code of 1954 was a major act of censorship that changed the course and trajectory of comic books over time.  

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll062" width="75" %}
