---
title: Glorifying Superman
layout: about
permalink: /Superman.html
credits: true
---
**Glorifying the "Superman"**

In 1940, an editorial written by book critic, Sterling North, titled “A National Disgrace”, was a catalyst for backlash against comic books. North expressed in his editorial how comic books take money from children in exchange for “graphic insanity” (North). Parents now worried about the content that their children were consuming and viewed comics as a violent stimulant. North goes on to blame parents, teachers, and publishers for allowing children access to these comics. One solution that was suggested was to supply children with classic literature in place of comic books.

During the Senate Hearings, Werthram expressed his dislike regarding the idea of Superman. One of Werthram’s main concerns was the display of violence and crime in comic books. While many people looked up to Superman –a hero who was a symbol of hope– Werthram disliked his super-human abilities and immunity and how he utilized such abilities in fighting crime, expressing that there was “sadistic joy in seeing other people punished over and over again while you yourself remain immune” (Senate 86). Moreover, due to the amount of children who read and looked up to Superman, Werthram disclosed that more children were looking up to Superman rather than their “hard working, prosaic father and mother” (Senate 86). Again, this ties back to the “glorification of Superman.” Essentially, Werthram worried that children’s admiration of Superman was an issue considering that the Superman comics displayed both real crime and unrealistic things, such as Superman’s abilities, power, and immunity.

The first issue of Captain America depicts aspects of “glorifying the Superman” as Wertham was concerned about. For one, the drawings in this comic are extremely dynamic, showing each of Captain America's punches and kicks with motion lines, streaking, onomatopeia, and action to action closure. These put specific emphasis on the violence and action of how Captain America is physically defeating his enemies, while not having any damage done to himself. The comic also depicts Wertham’s concern of kids aspiring to be like superhumans in Cap’s sidekick, Bucky. Bucky is portrayed as a young and naive kid who occasionally needs saving from Cap, and looks up to him deeply, saying “I wish I could be just like him!” (Kirby 8). The comic even provides a way for readers to be just like Cap, asking them to send 10 cents to “become a member of Captain America’s sentinels of liberty and join Captain America in his war against the spies” (Kirby 9). All of these aspects tie in directly to Wertham’s fears of children aspiring to be like “supermen”. In the Batman #1 Comic, the drawings, similar to Captain America Comics #1, show multiple motion lines, depicting the action occurring between the characters. Since the Batman Comics also focus on a hero fighting crime, this also ties back with one of Werthram’s concerns: showing real crime in comic books. Hence, children may look up to Batman as he is considered the hero; however, throughout Werthram’s testimony, he worries that children admire a hero rather than their parents (Senate 86). “Glorifying the Superman” was not really observed in horror or romance comics. Horror comics did have supernatural and superhuman characters, but these were usually tragic stories or portrayed in negative lights. It also was not shown in the romance comics we read, as the conflicts in these usually revolved around interpersonal relationships rather than crime or punishment.

Green Lantern, similar to Superman, was an example of the type of comic book figure that Wertham detested–the “superman.” Save his weakness to wood and the 24-hour time limit on the charge of his ring, Green Lantern was impervious to harm, and used that ability to carry out a brand of justice that, were it to be imposed by a court of law, would be found to be cruel and unusual. In this page from his first appearance and origin story, we see Green Lantern threatening a railroad executive who sabotaged his company’s train, killing many of his coworkers, with death by sudden stop. The panels, however, are arranged to center at the bottom of the page, in bold colors, his fantastical costume as he monologues dramatically about how “dark evil” cannot stand “the light of the Green Lantern!” And despite Green Lantern not technically making good on his threat, the top two panels are drawn in such a way as to emphasize the speed at which Green Lantern and his captive are flying, using speed lines and connecting background art across the panels. Immediately after signing a confession, the railroad executive dies of a heart attack, which Green Lantern blames on the shock of this flight. These last few panels also make use of dramatic lighting and highly dramatic, zealous dialogue to depict Alan Scott’s call to justice as the Green Lantern, emphasizing his connection to light and the “divine inspiration” of the lantern itself. Certainly this must have been unsettling to figures such as Wethram, who likely viewed such references to “destiny” and calls to fight evil as a vigilante as a terrible influence on children who were meant to be law-abiding citizens.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll056" width="75" %}
