---
title: Violence
layout: about
permalink: /Violence.html
credits: true
---
In the 1940s and 50s, violence was one of the most prominent features across all three genres of comics. Following the second world war, moral corruption was heavy on the minds of the American public after witnessing acts of genocide, use of weapons of mass destruction, and the general bloodshed of war. Intense use of propaganda by the axis and allied forces alike raised additional concerns about the ability of the media to transform the moral compass of the public. Popular media transitioned to telling darker, more sinister stories, often with heavy themes of violence. This excessive violence was not even confined to the horror or crime genre; we began to see the first traces of the extraordinary abilities of superheroes being used without restraint. Superman’s power alone is almost frightening upon examining the damage and destruction he can do with minimal effort. Even romances were not entirely without violence, much of which was depicted against women. As the genre of comics developed, concern was raised over these depictions of excessive violence. Worries about the impact of these books on children eventually lead to the self-censorship of these themes through the Comic Code Authority in 1954. There were strict guidelines imposed on scenes with violence almost to the point where no blood could be shown and some believed it weakened the stories themselves and limited the creativity of the creators. 
Furthermore, when delving into the work of Wertham and his testimony in the Senate Hearings, we have the ability to analyze the fears and concerns of Wertham and like-minded people. Predominantly, in his testimony Mr. Wertham makes a bold statement: if his tasks was to “teach children delinquency, to tell them how to rape and seduce girls, how to hurt people, how to break into stores, how to cheat, how to forge, how to do any known crime,” he “would have to enlist the crime comic book industry” (Senate 93). The crux of his argument is how comic books are serving as an instruction manual for children on how to commit violent acts. As a point of evidence, he claims these comics have a lack of a theme or moral, bringing up a specific one in which “the point of the story is that somebody gets beaten to death” (Senate 95). His statement while passionate is rather shortsighed, especially as a licensed psychologist who has done numerous studies. The choice of words almost places the entirety if not the entirety of the blame of violence and condemnable acts on the comic book industry. Conversely, opponents of his work argue precisely the opposite. Mr. Gains claims that from his experience as a comic book writer, any reasonable, mentally well child would not start committing acts of violence at a higher probability, saying that mentally unwell children may have a tendency for violence with or without the presence of comic books. He brings up the work of another doctor who has found evidence to the contrary of Wertham’s work. He summarizes their work with the statement: “I find comic books many times helpful for children in that through them they can get rid of many of their aggressions and harmful fantasies” (Senate 99). He claims that the violence present in comics can be a form of catharsis for those who read it. It’s important to note that Gaines is biased as a producer of these comics while Wertham stands to gain nothing personally from his point. Gaines furthermore made use of the fear of communism in his defense by pointing out the ability to view violence in news. He goes on to say the censorship of comics is a slippery slope to censoring everything. Both bring valid and maybe less valid arguments to the hearing, but the end result was the strict censorship of violence in comics after the hearing. 

The unbiased truth is that for examples of violence in comics Wertham and his proponents had plenty of options to choose from. One example of the comics that can be chosen was Tales from the Crypt #33 which likes most if not all of Tales from the Crypt comics is split up into a number of sub-stories. One of the sub-stories titled “This Trick’ll Kill You!” follows a couple who kill a little girl just to gain a length of magic rope. Thankfully, karma is swift and merciless on the couple, but all of this violence in one sub-story definitely would be evidence for the concern for violence. Furthermore, another choice to read was Detective Comics #40 which in all essence is a Batman comic. It’s the first appearance of the famous character, Clayface, in comics. It follows a number of killings with the killer's identity not being revealed until the very end. Even more potentially worrying, in this comic Clayface has no powers. He completed all the killings with accessible means. When analyzing Adventures into the Unknown no. 7, it’s easy to understand why horror comics were caught up in the panic. The stories focus on dark supernatural themes and violent images that critics worried would stick with young readers and blur their sense of right from wrong. These fears weren’t just theoretical either, but they were real-world events that made them feel more urgent. For example, newspapers described one murder as the “comic book hatchet slaying,” a phrase that shows how quick the media was to tie violent crimes back to comics (Roysdon). With that kind of framing, comics like Adventures into the Unknown weren’t just spooky entertainment anymore. They easily and quickly became proof to parents and lawmakers that comics could actually be harmful, feeding right into the arguments Wertham and the Senate would later make. Examining another 1940s comic, Jack Kirby and Joe Simon’s Young Romance #1, demonstrates how an exciting romance story still has concerning depictions of violence. The story involves a high school girl named Toni who was picked up by a man, Bob, who takes her on a date to a road house. Their date is crashed when the club gets raided by the police, Bob abandons Toni, and a gangster named Stanley saves Toni, punching Bob in the face and fighting off a police officer. This scene is particularly problematic, with a man who is complicit in various unspecified illegal activities is depicted as a hero for assaulting a man and a member of law enforcement.  Later, Toni is picked up again by another man named Jerry and held against her will. Jerry then tries to force himself on her and she runs away. While Jerry is certainly not depicted as an upstanding citizen, this incident may serve as an example to readers on committing violent acts against women. In conclusion, even from a randomly selected group of comics, violence was present in force, even before the introduction of the comic book code. 
{% include feature/image.html objectid="coll060" width="75" %}
